# Comparison to GNU Radio

Both GNU Radio and LuaRadio are frameworks for flow graph signal processing.
Many of the concepts regarding flow graphs and blocks in LuaRadio imitate or
are inspired by GNU Radio.

However, LuaRadio differs from GNU Radio in many respects:

* [Footprint](#footprint)
* [License](#license)
* [Extension](#extension)
* [Features](#features)
    * [Type Signatures](#type-signatures)
    * [Sample Rate Propagation](#sample-rate-propagation)
    * [Embeddability](#embeddability)
* [Performance](#performance)
* [Maturity](#maturity)

## Footprint

A binary GNU Radio installation weighs in at over 100 MB. When the installation
includes development support, the [boost](http://www.boost.org/) development
files and numerous other libraries and tools (gsl, blas, swig, orc, etc.) can
add another 100 MB or more.

GNU Radio compilation is slow, especially on embedded targets. Compiled
versions of GNU Radio modules and applications can also break in complex ways
when GNU Radio or the boost runtime is updated. These modules and applications
require routine re-compilation — sometimes in a very particular order — to be
linked correctly with the updated libraries and with each other.

LuaRadio's total footprint is on the order of 1 MB and requires no compilation.
LuaRadio has zero dependencies for non-real-time applications, and may
otherwise use [liquid-dsp](https://github.com/jgaeddert/liquid-dsp) or
[libvolk](http://libvolk.org/) for acceleration in real-time applications.
[liquid-dsp](https://github.com/jgaeddert/liquid-dsp) shares LuaRadio's
affinity for minimal dependencies and making software defined radio more
accessible to embedded Linux platforms.

## License

GNU Radio is licensed GPL v3, a
[copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft) license.

LuaRadio is licensed MIT, a more permissive license.

## Extension

GNU Radio blocks are written in C++ and have a lot of boilerplate for building,
Python binding, and testing. Blocks sometimes use an esoteric form of string
templating, e.g.
[add_XX_impl.cc.t](https://github.com/gnuradio/gnuradio/blob/v3.7.9.2/gr-blocks/lib/add_XX_impl.cc.t#L53),
to code generate support for multiple data types.  For examples of typical GNU
Radio blocks, see the GNU Radio [Out-of-tree Modules
guide](http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki/OutOfTreeModules) and
[Blocks Coding
Guide](http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki/BlocksCodingGuide),
or the source code of one of the third-party modules on
[CGRAN](http://www.cgran.org/).

In GNU Radio, it's not possible to define first-class custom data types for
serialization between blocks, but blocks may exchange Protocol Data Units
(PDUs) with [Tagged
Streams](http://gnuradio.org/doc/doxygen/page_tagged_stream_blocks.html), which
demarcate the boundaries of the structured data, or with asynchronous [Message
Passing](http://gnuradio.org/doc/doxygen/page_msg_passing.html), which pass the
data out-of-band of flow graph streams.

LuaRadio blocks are written in pure Lua, have substantially less boilerplate,
and require no compilation. LuaRadio blocks do not require bindings for the
convenience of scripting. Blocks can support multiple data types natively, e.g
[`AddBlock`](../radio/blocks/signal/add.lua), with LuaRadio's type signature
system.  See the [Creating Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md) guide for more details
on LuaRadio blocks.

LuaRadio allows defining custom data types based on fixed-size C structures or
variable-sized Lua objects for serialization between blocks. This makes it easy
and natural to create blocks that produce structured data (e.g. decoded
packets). See the custom types section of [Creating
Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md#custom-types) for examples.

## Features

### Type Signatures

GNU Radio's I/O signature system is limited to matching sizes of types (e.g.
`sizeof(gr_complex)`) in block connections, whereas LuaRadio's type signature
system is much more flexible. Types in block connections are matched explicitly
in LuaRadio, and input types can also be specified by a function predicate.
For example, the [`JSONSink`](0.reference-manual.md#jsonsink) block can accept
any data type that implements `to_json()`.

GNU Radio blocks can only support one type signature, which pushes the problem
of block type differentiation to the users. GNU Radio has developed a rich
nomenclature for annotating their block names with their type signature, using
suffixes like `_cc` and `_ff`, e.g. `multiply_cc`, `multiply_ff`,
`fir_filter_ccc`, `fir_filter_ccf`, `fir_filter_fff` — scroll through [GNU
Radio Sphinx documentation](http://gnuradio.org/doc/sphinx/) for more examples.

On the other hand, LuaRadio blocks can support multiple type signatures. For
example, the [`MultiplyBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#multiplyblock) and
[`FIRFilterBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#firfilterblock) can accept both
complex-valued and real-valued input/output types, and the framework will
automatically differentiate the correct type signature based on the block's
connections in a flow graph. This helps with code reuse and consolidation, as
well as ease of use for building flow graphs.

### Sample Rate Propagation

GNU Radio requires users to manually specify the sample rate of every block.
This is alleviated by defining common sample rates in variables that are shared
among blocks, but ultimately is still error prone. Some blocks need normalized
parameters (e.g. angular frequency), which also requires users to compute the
correct normalization.

LuaRadio automatically propagates sample rates between all blocks.  This
reduces the chance of user error, as LuaRadio blocks require less
configuration, and any frequency parameters that are required are in units of
hertz. It also allows for a suite of convenience blocks that automatically
perform sample rate dependent initialization, e.g.  the
[`LowpassFilterBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#lowpassfilterblock), whose
parameters are just number of taps and a cutoff frequency in hertz.

### Embeddability

LuaRadio's small footprint allows it to be wholly embeddable in applications.
See the [Embedding LuaRadio](4.embedding-luaradio.md) guide for more details
and examples.

## Performance

GNU Radio generally performs better than LuaRadio. If performance down to the
last kilosamples per second is your priority, then you should use GNU Radio.

That being said, LuaRadio performance is more than adequate for real-time SDR
projects, and is almost always on the same order as GNU Radio performance. For
example, in cases where a particular GNU Radio block does 630 MS/s, the
equivalent LuaRadio block might do 300 MS/s. On very computationally expensive
operations, LuaRadio performance approaches or matches GNU Radio performance.
For example, FIR filtering performance in both frameworks is nearly identical.
In some cases, LuaRadio performance exceeds GNU Radio performance.

See the [Benchmarks](http://luaradio.io/benchmarks) page for empirical
benchmarks on both LuaRadio and GNU Radio across several platforms.

Future infrastructure improvements and additional library acceleration will
help LuaRadio close the performance gap.

## Maturity

GNU Radio has a larger community, more blocks, more hardware support, and a
more mature codebase.

GNU Radio currently has more efficient signal processing blocks, like blocks
with integrated decimation and translation, but these can be added to LuaRadio
as needed.
